---
title: "A buyer’s guide to soil carbon offsets"
last_modified_at: 2021-07-09T16:20:02-05:00
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - carbon credits
  - carbon market
  - soils
---

> Improving the transparency and scientific integrity of carbon removal and climate solutions through open data and tools  

Voluntary carbon markets are ramping up efforts to credit soil carbon removal, with federal lawmakers and state regulators eager to follow suit.

Most of the enthusiasm centers on agricultural practices like reducing tillage intensity, planting cover crops, and improving grazing management. These practices have the potential to simultaneously increase soil health, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and enhance carbon sinks — a seemingly win-win solution.

Improving soil health and ecosystems is unequivocally positive. But determining when certain agricultural practices actually increase carbon stocks, and how to measure and credit their gains, remains exceedingly complex. The efficacy of soil carbon interventions depends on local climate conditions, land management history, and soil characteristics. Soil carbon, meanwhile, varies substantially over time, space, and depth. On top of that, any changes in soil carbon occur slowly, which makes it difficult to reliably track changes once new practices are implemented.

A number of protocols for crediting soil carbon have emerged to tackle this complexity. Some were developed by third-party offset registries like Verra and Gold Standard, while others come from new companies like Nori and the Regen Network. Each protocol specifies the detailed rules under which projects claim credits that can be sold to buyers. More than a dozen protocols exist, and they vary across key dimensions like scientific rigor, additionality, and durability. As a result, getting to the bottom of what these different protocols require is not an easy task.

To help address the opacity in today’s market, [Carbon Plan](https://carbonplan.org) systematically reviewed 14 soil carbon protocols on 33 technical dimensions. We focused on protocols that were publicly available and could be used to certify or issue credits for soil carbon removal — activities that draw carbon out of the atmosphere and sequester it in soil. We excluded protocols still in development or that credit solely on the basis of avoided emissions.

The findings reveal that robust crediting of soil carbon is hard and that none of the existing protocols is doing enough to guarantee good outcomes. While this conclusion doesn’t mean that all projects are generating low-quality credits, the lack of rigorous standards makes it hard to ensure good climate outcomes in the voluntary market. Buyers that care about quality must screen candidate projects themselves, while developers of high-integrity projects must compete against those who might take advantage of lax standards. The additional due diligence required today could limit the role soil carbon can play in effective climate strategy and highlights the need for systematic market reforms.

## What They did
* 1 They reviewed publicly available voluntary market protocols used to credit activities affecting soil organic carbon (or SOC, which we call soil carbon here for brevity.  

* 2 They developed four metrics that collectively help determine whether the credits generated under each protocol would lead to quantifiable, additional soil carbon removal.  

Rigor | Approach to quantifying or estimating soil carbon using physical soil sampling, modeling tools, or a combination of approaches.  
Additionality | Approach to analyzing the causal relationship between the funds a project seeks via generating credits and the climate benefits it claims to produce.  
Durability | Duration of carbon removal permanence promised and consideration of strategies to manage reversal risks.  
Safeguards | Consideration of provisions to treat landowners fairly, to protect their privacy rights, and to engage local communities.  

Each metric includes a set of descriptive attributes that together inform a 
qualitative score on a scale from 1 to 3. Based on four individual 
metric scores, we assigned each protocol an overall rating from 1 to 5. 
We also harmonized metadata for each protocol, categorized which 
agricultural practices were included, and produced a timeline showing 
the relationship between project activity, crediting, verification, and 
claimed permanence. The full results, including comments and references 
for all dimensions we evaluated, are available as an  as well as downloadable <a href="https://storage.googleapis.com/carbonplan-research/articles/soil-protocols/CarbonPlan-Soil-Protocols.csv" class="css-wwmakc">CSV</a> and <a href="https://storage.googleapis.com/carbonplan-research/articles/soil-protocols/CarbonPlan-Soil-Protocols.json" class="css-wwmakc">JSON</a> files.    

In  the chart below, we summarize our results by showing scores for rigor, additionality, durability, and safeguards, alongside our overall rating 
across the full set of protocols.

FIGURE <!-- -->
## Summary
 table of our results. Each protocol is a row. The first four columns 
show scores along four individual metrics (each on a scale from 1 to 3) 
and the final column shows the overall rating (on a scale from 1 to 5). 
For more details, check out the<!-- --> <a href="https://carbonplan.org/research/soil-protocols" class="css-hhgexu">interactive version</a> <!-- -->of
 this table. Abbreviations: Grazing (G), Compost (C) Improved 
Agriculture (IA), Sustainable Agriculture (SA), Fire + Grazing (FG)</figcaption><p class="css-13hj20z">Before
 describing our results, it is useful to highlight two methodological 
challenges we faced. The first concerns the different greenhouse gas 
emissions and carbon cycle processes involved in this area. Most of the 
protocols we reviewed credit some combination of carbon removal and 
avoided emissions, including CO₂ emissions unrelated to soil carbon 
(e.g. tractor use), and in some cases other greenhouse gases like N₂O 
and CH₄ that result from fertilizer use, grazing animals, or anaerobic 
decomposition.
Technically,  increases to soil carbon stocks themselves include a mixture of carbon 
removal and avoiding carbon loss, though the combined effect of these 
mechanisms is often referred to as carbon removal.<!-- --> <!-- --> <!-- --> <i></i>


 No protocols track carbon removal and avoided emissions separately, so 
buyers looking to focus exclusively on carbon removal must decipher this
 distinction themselves.  Another challenge 
followed from the breadth of protocol applicability. The protocols we 
reviewed apply to a range of geographies and a wide variety of land 
management practices, including cropping, tillage, grazing, managing 
agricultural inputs, and other agricultural practices that affect soil 
carbon stocks. Protocols with broad applicability generally involve a 
level of methodological abstraction and user optionality. The 
combination of opaque rules and multiple pathways to satisfying protocol
 requirements makes it difficult to determine what requirements are 
actually in place, and therefore what buyers can expect as guaranteed 
outcomes.  In the sections below, we describe 
our cross-cutting, metric-by-metric observations. For each metric, we 
start by explaining how we arrived at our scores.</p><h2 id="rigor" class="css-l5ychx">Rigor</h2><p class="css-13hj20z">Our rigor metric analyzes the scientific integrity and methodological robustness of soil carbon quantification.</p><div class="css-1j5zx4p"><hr class="css-ip5101"><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">Protocol
 uses empirical crediting based directly on soil sampling and overall 
quality of both sampling and modeling is as high as possible.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">Protocol
 relies on modeling for crediting, models are calibrated or 
parameterized with samples, and overall quality of both sampling and 
modeling is as high as possible. Alternatively, protocol uses empirical 
crediting based directly on soil sampling, and overall quality of 
sampling is adequate.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">Protocol
 relies on modeling for crediting, and either does not use sampling or 
has only weak or adequate sampling. Alternatively, protocol uses 
empirical crediting but with weak sampling.</div></div><hr class="css-h7c7r6"></div><p class="css-13hj20z">In
 our view, robust soil carbon crediting requires empirical measurements.
 But we repeatedly found protocols relying partially or completely on 
modeling to quantify and credit soil carbon gains. Only 3 of 14 
protocols require direct sampling as the basis for issuing soil carbon 
credits (which we call “empirical crediting”). Others require sampling 
to calibrate or parameterize models, but not to issue credits. Several 
protocols do not require sampling at all, relying exclusively on models 
to estimate soil carbon changes and issue credits.  This
 pattern is concerning because models are imperfect analogs when it 
comes to soil carbon. They rely on a number of assumptions which may not
 be applicable in specific contexts and can lead to incorrect 
predictions of soil carbon outcomes.<span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-172zaon"><sup>2</sup></span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/5/3/034003" class="css-1k3yyyr"><span class="css-vurnku"><span class="css-xzcb66"><span class="css-1sztpic">2</span><span class="css-18w35j">J. Sanderman &amp; J. A. Baldock<!-- --> <!-- -->(2010)<!-- --> <!-- -->Accounting for soil carbon sequestration in national inventories: a soil scientist’s perspective<!-- --> <i>Environmental Research Letters</i> </span></span></span></a></span><span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-e4uwin"><sup>,</sup></span></span><span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-172zaon"><sup>3</sup></span><a href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304380007001251" class="css-1k3yyyr"><span class="css-vurnku"><span class="css-xzcb66"><span class="css-1sztpic">3</span><span class="css-18w35j">S M Ogle et al.<!-- --> <!-- -->(2007)<!-- --> <!-- -->An empirically based approach for estimating uncertainty associated with modelling carbon sequestration in soils<!-- --> <i>Ecological Modeling</i> </span></span></span></a></span>
 For example, models routinely make assumptions about the persistence 
and accrual of soil carbon over time, including that it increases 
linearly, that fields are in a state of equilibrium, and that proxy 
measurements like remote sensing can accurately conceptualize ecosystem 
processes. The most rigorous models still use measurements for 
calibration, and thus depend on high-quality sampling approaches.  Where
 sampling is required in today’s protocols, the quality requirements are
 generally poor. With only a few exceptions, protocols fail to require 
rigorous stratification, sampling randomization, adequate sampling 
density to encompass the within-site variation, and <a href="https://carbonplan.org/research/soil-depth-sampling" class="css-5k9301">sampling beyond the top 30cm</a>
 to include the entire volume of soil impacted by agricultural 
activities. Even protocols with the highest rigor scores still have 
weaknesses — BCarbon’s protocol, for example, does not provide specific 
guidance on sampling depth, and it does not track additional greenhouse 
gases, leaving open the possibility of boosting local soil carbon gains 
with external amendments like fertilizer without properly accounting for
 their emissions.  Notably, two of the three 
protocols with robust sampling requirements — Verra Soil and BCarbon — 
reference or adopt a common protocol module from 2012, Verra’s 
Estimation of Stocks in the Soil Carbon Pool (VMD0021). Another, Gold 
Standard, does not require sampling, but when projects choose sampling 
the protocol suggests using the same Verra module. This pattern 
demonstrates that the voluntary carbon markets identified a reasonably 
rigorous sampling standard almost a decade ago, prior to the more recent
 surge in soil carbon credit interest. Nevertheless, sampling standards 
have generally fallen since then, potentially reflecting a mismatch 
between sampling costs and market prices.</p><h2 id="additionality" class="css-l5ychx">Additionality</h2><p class="css-13hj20z">Our
 additionality metric evaluates a protocol’s approach to crediting only 
those projects that take new actions, rather than those that have 
already adopted or could independently adopt beneficial management 
practices.</p><div class="css-1j5zx4p"><hr class="css-ip5101"><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">A
 rigorous project-level or programmatic additionality test that takes 
into account real data about the existing adoption of all creditable 
agricultural practices at a level of geographic resolution that 
accurately reflects real-world market trends.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">A
 project-level or programmatic additionality test that is not adequately
 grounded in real-world data about the existing adoption of all 
creditable agricultural practices, and/or is implemented at a level of 
geographic resolution that masks real-world market trends.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">No
 additionality test or a transparently cynical and ineffective test that
 is designed to create the appearance of a robust additionality screen.</div></div><hr class="css-h7c7r6"></div><p class="css-13hj20z">We
 found that buyers cannot rely on any of the protocols to ensure 
additionality. Only one protocol (Verra’s 2020 Improved Agriculture 
protocol) adequately protects against large-scale non-additional 
crediting, but even it does not provide sufficient assurance of project 
additionality.<span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-172zaon"><sup>4</sup></span><a href="https://grist.org/agriculture/us-carbon-removal-capture-offset-forests-farms-trees-soil/" class="css-1k3yyyr"><span class="css-vurnku"><span class="css-xzcb66"><span class="css-1sztpic">4</span><span class="css-18w35j">A recent article in Grist suggests that many soil projects today are non-additional.<!-- --> <!-- --> <!-- --> <i></i> </span></span></span></a></span>  A majority of the protocols apply or replicate the much-criticized Clean Development Mechanism additionality standards,<span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-172zaon"><sup>5</sup></span><a href="https://doi.org/10.3763/cpol.2008.0533" class="css-1k3yyyr"><span class="css-vurnku"><span class="css-xzcb66"><span class="css-1sztpic">5</span><span class="css-18w35j">L Schneider<!-- --> <!-- -->(2009)<!-- --> <!-- -->Assessing the additionality of CDM projects: practical experiences and lessons learned<!-- --> <i>Climate Policy</i> </span></span></span></a></span>
 including the Verra Improved Agriculture protocol. A few protocols, 
like Nori, Regen Network, and BCarbon, simply do not address 
additionality at all. In other cases, protocols appear to be designed to
 create the false appearance of rigorous additionality tests. For 
example, Verra’s Improved Agriculture protocol requires projects to 
identify peer-reviewed evidence of “barriers” to their deployment, but 
then provides example citations that could substantiate barriers to any 
agricultural practice changes — effectively providing an answer to its 
own question.  In a similar vein, the Climate 
Action Reserve’s protocol (CAR Soil) features a convoluted test that 
enables projects to treat all practices as additional. This protocol 
uses a common practice approach to additionality that defines activities
 below an adoption threshold as additional, and those above it as 
non-additional. The protocol uses a high threshold (50% adoption), which
 is evaluated on a county level; such a high threshold risks crediting 
existing practices that are already quite common by any conventional 
measure, but which nevertheless satisfy the CAR Soil threshold. Other 
protocols use lower thresholds (5-20%) when automatically designating 
projects as additional on this basis. Although the CAR Soil protocol 
defines practices with a greater than 50% adoption as non-additional, it
 nevertheless allows projects to credit those same practices if they are
 combined with other practices that featured a less-than-50% adoption 
rate. Thus, projects that combine multiple practices can easily avoid 
the superficial prohibition on commonly adopted practices — an outcome 
that, in our view, creates the <a href="https://carbonplan.org/research/soil-carbon-comment" class="css-wwmakc">false appearance of an additionality standard</a>.  The
 lack of meaningful additionality testing across all the protocols we 
analyzed highlights the need for buyers to consider additionality 
carefully in their deliberations. We recommend that buyers specifically 
ask sellers for information about the nature of the practices being 
credited, including how common they are in a project’s immediate 
locality and what evidence the seller has about how credits helped 
induce a change in land management decisions.<span class="css-qrli5z"><span class="css-172zaon"><sup>6</sup></span><span class="css-1k3yyyr"><span class="css-vurnku"><span class="css-xzcb66"><span class="css-1sztpic">6</span><span class="css-18w35j">We
 note that asking projects for this kind of information is not 
particularly reliable, as of course projects have the incentive to make 
an unbalanced case. But that is exactly why protocols are supposed to 
help filter out the less-credible claims, and therefore why the lack of 
rigorous standards is a problem.<!-- --> <!-- --> <!-- --> <i></i> </span></span></span></span></span>  Beyond
 explicit additionality tests, how a protocol treats the timing of 
activity adoption and crediting has important implications for 
additionality outcomes. Consider the example of a land manager who 
adopted a beneficial management practice change some 10 or 15 years in 
the past. If the protocol allows a land manager to earn credit for her 
earlier change, it might compensate “early adopters” but would do so at 
the expense of offset credit additionality because paying someone for a 
change they adopted in the distant past does not change soil carbon 
outcomes.  To help visualize how key project 
milestones impact crediting, we created a timeline for each protocol 
that shows when an eligible activity could have been implemented 
relative to project registration, and for what period soil carbon 
changes can be credited. Here we show two hypothetical timelines 
representing typical and more rigorous approaches.</p><div class="css-vhajwh"><div class="css-yqyd6y"><div class="css-17j7yfb">Typical<!-- --> timeline</div><div style="width:100%;height:100%;position:relative"><div class="css-dw066y"><div class="css-9imxfz">Time&nbsp;<span class="css-9u6chx">years</span><svg viewBox="0 0 20 20" class="css-9ptl3r"><path d="M2.93,15.66c-0.18-0.18-0.18-0.32,0-0.5l9.73-9.7H5.74c-0.25,0-0.36-0.11-0.36-0.36V3.16 c0-0.29,0.11-0.36,0.36-0.36h10.13c0.79,0,1.33,0.54,1.33,1.3v10.17c0,0.25-0.11,0.36-0.36,0.36H14.9c-0.25,0-0.36-0.11-0.36-0.36 V7.3L4.8,17.07c-0.18,0.18-0.32,0.18-0.5,0L2.93,15.66z"></path></svg></div></div><div class="css-15bmfv8"><div class="css-1g304hd"></div><div class="css-1j2wn8s"></div><div class="css-1r1t9d6"></div><div class="css-gpysmp"></div><div class="css-1fxiqjl"></div><div class="css-crp522"></div></div><div class="css-12eubk6"><div class="css-5izidm"></div><div class="css-ahw8a2"></div><div class="css-yhysa7"></div><div class="css-noxleu"></div><div class="css-1eholwh"></div><div class="css-rbgyek"></div></div><div class="css-12eubk6"><span class="css-1o6ee07">-20</span><span class="css-hfcgij">-10</span><span class="css-93xb6q">Start</span><span class="css-f37j22">10</span><span class="css-hx2a10">20</span><span class="css-vqyw14">30</span></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 1px);left:0px;top:0px;transform:translate(0.5px, 0.5px)"><svg height="100%" viewBox="0 0 100 100" width="100%" preserveAspectRatio="none" class="css-7tog9v"><rect x="20" y="58.33333333333333" width="20" height="25" class="css-tat2v9"></rect><rect x="30" y="16.666666666666664" width="30" height="25" class="css-tat2v9"></rect></svg></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 0px);left:0px;top:0px"><div style="position:absolute;top:41.666666666666664%;left:20%"><div class="css-1xjgxlw">Activity</div></div></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 0px);left:0px;top:0px"><div style="position:absolute;top:0%;left:30%"><div class="css-1xjgxlw">Crediting</div></div></div></div></div><div class="css-yqyd6y"><div class="css-17j7yfb">Rigorous<!-- --> timeline</div><div style="width:100%;height:100%;position:relative"><div class="css-dw066y"><div class="css-9imxfz">Time&nbsp;<span class="css-9u6chx">years</span><svg viewBox="0 0 20 20" class="css-9ptl3r"><path d="M2.93,15.66c-0.18-0.18-0.18-0.32,0-0.5l9.73-9.7H5.74c-0.25,0-0.36-0.11-0.36-0.36V3.16 c0-0.29,0.11-0.36,0.36-0.36h10.13c0.79,0,1.33,0.54,1.33,1.3v10.17c0,0.25-0.11,0.36-0.36,0.36H14.9c-0.25,0-0.36-0.11-0.36-0.36 V7.3L4.8,17.07c-0.18,0.18-0.32,0.18-0.5,0L2.93,15.66z"></path></svg></div></div><div class="css-15bmfv8"><div class="css-1g304hd"></div><div class="css-1j2wn8s"></div><div class="css-1r1t9d6"></div><div class="css-gpysmp"></div><div class="css-1fxiqjl"></div><div class="css-crp522"></div></div><div class="css-12eubk6"><div class="css-5izidm"></div><div class="css-ahw8a2"></div><div class="css-yhysa7"></div><div class="css-noxleu"></div><div class="css-1eholwh"></div><div class="css-rbgyek"></div></div><div class="css-12eubk6"><span class="css-1o6ee07">-20</span><span class="css-hfcgij">-10</span><span class="css-93xb6q">Start</span><span class="css-f37j22">10</span><span class="css-hx2a10">20</span><span class="css-vqyw14">30</span></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 1px);left:0px;top:0px;transform:translate(0.5px, 0.5px)"><svg height="100%" viewBox="0 0 100 100" width="100%" preserveAspectRatio="none" class="css-7tog9v"><rect x="36" y="58.33333333333333" width="4" height="25" class="css-tat2v9"></rect><rect x="36" y="16.666666666666664" width="24" height="25" class="css-tat2v9"></rect></svg></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 0px);left:0px;top:0px"><div style="position:absolute;top:41.666666666666664%;left:36%"><div class="css-1xjgxlw">Activity</div></div></div><div style="position:absolute;height:calc(100% - 50px);width:calc(100% - 0px);left:0px;top:0px"><div style="position:absolute;top:0%;left:36%"><div class="css-1xjgxlw">Crediting</div></div></div></div></div></div><figcaption class="css-8ypwj5"><div class="css-1kj7774">FIGURE <!-- -->2</div> <div class="css-t95sjb">/</div>Hypothetical
 timelines showing when eligible activities could be implemented 
relative to the start of project implementation. The typical case we 
observed allows for a long period of backdating (above) whereas a more 
rigorous timeline restricts this window (below).</figcaption><p class="css-13hj20z">In
 the typical timeline, relevant activities can be implemented 5 to 10 
years prior to project registration — something we found in 10 of 14 
protocols. Some protocols allow projects to earn “back-credits” for the 
entirety of that historical period; others restrict the crediting window
 while still allowing older practice changes to earn credits going 
forward. If a buyer wants confidence that their purchase creates climate
 benefits that would not have happened otherwise, either type of 
backdating raises concerns.  The logistics of 
registering and crediting projects makes it impossible to 
instantaneously recognize changes in land management practice, so a 
modest amount of backdating can be justified. To establish a causal 
relationship between carbon financing and climate benefits, however, any
 delay should be minimized.  We note that not 
all buyers need to be concerned with additionality. If a government 
program seeks to compensate land managers for their beneficial 
practices, including paying “early adopters” who had already changed 
course, then additionality is not necessarily a relevant concept. But 
for companies or governments that want to justify ongoing emissions with
 offset credits, additionality is a critical issue. Unfortunately, none 
of the protocols feature an adequate additionality test, which means the
 task of screening for projects that deliver additional climate benefits
 is left entirely to the buyer.</p><h2 id="durability" class="css-l5ychx">Durability</h2><p class="css-13hj20z">Our
 durability metric evaluates how the protocol considers risk to carbon 
storage permanence and implements strategies to mitigate those risks.</p><div class="css-1j5zx4p"><hr class="css-ip5101"><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">A
 permanence period approaching or exceeding 100 years, plus a rigorous 
buffer pool and/or a rigorous alternative insurance instrument.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">A
 permanence period of 10 years or more, plus at least a moderately 
robust buffer pool and/or a moderately robust alternative insurance 
instrument.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">A permanence period of less than 10 years, or an inadequate buffer pool and/or no explicit permanence protections.</div></div><hr class="css-h7c7r6"></div><p class="css-13hj20z">Fossil
 carbon emissions have atmospheric effects that last for hundreds to 
thousands of years. Effective carbon removal needs to <a href="https://carbonplan.org/research/permanence-calculator-explainer" class="css-5k9301">confront this physical reality</a>,
 but many strategies, including soil carbon, are vulnerable to potential
 reversals — where the carbon that is removed is released to the 
atmosphere again. No intervention in an agricultural system can 
guarantee outcomes over hundreds of years, but we can look to the 
permanence required by protocols and the protections they provide to 
ensure outcomes over those time horizons.  We 
did not find any protocols that achieved a high bar for durability, 
which requires both a long permanence period and robust risk management 
provisions. Only one of the protocols (CAR Soil) requires a permanence 
period approaching 100 years, but its risk management provisions are 
relatively weak. The other protocols adopt permanence periods between 8 
and 40 years.  Of the protocols with shorter 
permanence periods, risk management protections are also generally weak.
 One protocol (Nori) has no explicit protections. The majority of 
protocols adopt general registry rules for risk analysis and mitigation,
 which typically involve projects setting aside a number of credits in a
 registry-managed <a href="https://carbonplan.org/research/offset-project-fire" class="css-5k9301">buffer pool</a> that can be drawn down to account for “reversals” (or carbon loss) over time.  Buffer
 pool contributions are determined by a variety of approaches across the
 protocols. Ironically, the highest mandatory buffer pool contribution 
we observed comes from the simplest approach: Gold Standard requires 
projects to contribute credits equal to 20% of their claimed benefits to
 its buffer pool, with no project-specific consideration of risk. On the
 more complex end of the spectrum, all Verra protocols require projects 
to rate risk across 50 categories, which typically results in a 10-15% 
buffer contribution. ACR protocols similarly require projects to rate 
risk across up to 8 categories, resulting in a 8-16% buffer 
contribution. The CAR Soil protocol takes a slightly different approach,
 featuring a simple lookup table that results in a 5-17% buffer 
contribution.  Notably, the buffer 
contributions did not clearly correlate with claimed permanence 
horizons. In other words, a 10-year permanence claim and a 100-year 
permanence claim could both end up ensured by a 10% buffer contribution.
 This inconsistency implies that either permanence estimates or buffer 
contributions have been calculated incorrectly — and possibly both.  In
 two cases (Gold Standard and ACR), registry rules allow a project to 
satisfy its buffer pool contribution requirement with credits from 
another project. This scheme enables credits from older or lower-quality
 projects to fulfill buffer pool obligations. Given the <a href="https://trove-intelligence.com/" class="css-wwmakc">surplus credits available in the market</a>, flexible contribution rules raise concerns about buffer pools’ efficacy, regardless of their size.  Our
 main takeaway on durability is that the numbers parametrizing risk 
mitigation measures are not the result of particularly clear or 
empirical considerations of risks. Rarely, if ever, are risks calibrated
 to a project’s particular region or agricultural context, including the
 distinct socioeconomic factors and contractual risks that are relevant 
for landowners. Farmers and ranchers frequently go bankrupt, but buyers 
will find nothing in the protocols that provides an evidence-based 
system for addressing the risk that soil carbon promises go under when 
agricultural businesses do, too.</p><h2 id="safeguards" class="css-l5ychx">Safeguards</h2><p class="css-13hj20z">Our
 safeguards metric looks at the adequacy of protocol requirements to 
protect the interests of landowners, communities, and the local 
environment.</p><div class="css-1j5zx4p"><hr class="css-ip5101"><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">At least two safeguards included as robust and rigorous requirements.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">At least one safeguard included as a robust and rigorous requirement.</div></div><div class="css-xeezea"><div class="css-14sx05d"><div class="css-1xmhggq"><svg stroke="none" fill="none" class="css-1y3uaem"><rect x="0" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-3igjs8"></rect><rect x="36%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect><rect x="72%" y="0" width="31%" height="12" class="css-9227n8"></rect></svg></div></div><div class="css-1fyp62u">No safeguards included as robust and rigorous requirements.</div></div><hr class="css-h7c7r6"></div><p class="css-13hj20z">With
 only one partial exception, no protocols include strong requirements 
around landowner protections, data privacy, or community engagement. 
Most are simply silent. In a couple of cases, protocols gesture towards 
these issues with recommendations or plans for future engagement, but 
these provisions are far from robust and lack specificity.  As
 researchers without deep expertise in social and local environmental 
safeguards, we hesitate to say what should be required or how to ensure 
that standards deliver more than a box-checking exercise. Nevertheless, 
the near-total absence of even superficial standards was notable in a 
sector where land use decisions can have profound impacts on communities
 and local environments.
 
 ## Conclusions
 In
 the vast majority of cases, the standards set by these protocols cannot
 be used to provide confidence around project quality. Buyers can’t rely
 on existing protocols to know whether a project was rigorously 
credited, and sellers can’t invoke or rely on the status quo rules to 
demonstrate quality. The question of defining a good project must be 
answered, instead, outside of the voluntary market’s formal rules.

> Buyers can’t rely on existing protocols to know whether a project was rigorously credited

 be clear, we didn’t analyze individual projects here. It’s entirely 
possible that individual projects credited under these protocols perform
 far better than the minimum bar set by a given protocol. On the other 
hand, it’s also possible for projects to exploit ambiguities in 
otherwise seemingly rigorous components of a protocol. Our core finding 
is that buyers must analyze individual projects to determine whether 
they meet a reasonable definition of quality, since none of the 
protocols provides adequate assurances.  One of
 our most striking results is that most protocols set a low bar on soil 
sampling quality, which we consider essential to issuing robust carbon 
credits. One possible explanation is that choosing to not require robust
 sampling reduces project costs and therefore increases the likelihood 
of market uptake, especially when buyers are unaware of or relatively 
unconcerned with credit quality. The risk, of course, is that not 
sampling, or sampling poorly, leads to a higher probability of issuing 
credits that do not represent real carbon removal.
